NCURSES Programming HOWTO

2.2.2. The mysterious refresh()
The next line printw prints the string "Hello World !!!" on to the screen. This function is analogous to normal
printf in all respects except that it prints the data on a window called stdscr at the current (y,x) co−ordinates.
Since our present co−ordinates are at 0,0 the string is printed at the left hand corner of the window.
This brings us to that mysterious refresh(). Well, when we called printw the data is actually written to an
imaginary window, which is not updated on the screen yet. The job of printw is to update a few flags and data
structures and write the data to a buffer corresponding to stdscr. In order to show it on the screen, we need to
call refresh() and tell the curses system to dump the contents on the screen.
The philosophy behind all this is to allow the programmer to do multiple updates on the imaginary screen or
windows and do a refresh once all his screen update is done. refresh() checks the window and updates only the
portion which has been changed. This improves performance and offers greater flexibility too. But, it is
sometimes frustrating to beginners. A common mistake committed by beginners is to forget to call refresh()
after they did some update through printw() class of functions. I still forget to add it sometimes :−)

2.2.3. About endwin()
And finally don't forget to end the curses mode. Otherwise your terminal might behave strangely after the
program quits. endwin() frees the memory taken by curses sub−system and its data structures and puts the
terminal in normal mode. This function must be called after you are done with the curses mode.

2. Hello World !!!

8

3. The Gory Details
Now that we have seen how to write a simple curses program let's get into the details. There are many
functions that help customize what you see on screen and many features which can be put to full use.
Here we go...

3. The Gory Details

9

4. Initialization
We now know that to initialize curses system the function initscr() has to be called. There are functions which
can be called after this initialization to customize our curses session. We may ask the curses system to set the
terminal in raw mode or initialize color or initialize the mouse etc.. Let's discuss some of the functions that are
normally called immediately after initscr();

4.1. Initialization functions
4.2. raw() and cbreak()
Normally the terminal driver buffers the characters a user types until a new line or carriage return is
encountered. But most programs require that the characters be available as soon as the user types them. The
above two functions are used to disable line buffering. The difference between these two functions is in the
way control characters like suspend (CTRL−Z), interrupt and quit (CTRL−C) are passed to the program. In
the raw() mode these characters are directly passed to the program without generating a signal. In the
cbreak() mode these control characters are interpreted as any other character by the terminal driver. I
personally prefer to use raw() as I can exercise greater control over what the user does.

4.3. echo() and noecho()
These functions control the echoing of characters typed by the user to the terminal. noecho() switches off
echoing. The reason you might want to do this is to gain more control over echoing or to suppress unnecessary
echoing while taking input from the user through the getch() etc. functions. Most of the interactive programs
call noecho() at initialization and do the echoing of characters in a controlled manner. It gives the
programmer the flexibility of echoing characters at any place in the window without updating current (y,x)
co−ordinates.

4.4. keypad()
This is my favorite initialization function. It enables the reading of function keys like F1, F2, arrow keys etc.
Almost every interactive program enables this, as arrow keys are a major part of any User Interface. Do
keypad(stdscr, TRUE) to enable this feature for the regular screen (stdscr). You will learn more about
key management in later sections of this document.

4.5. halfdelay()
This function, though not used very often, is a useful one at times. halfdelay()is called to enable the
half−delay mode, which is similar to the cbreak() mode in that characters typed are immediately available to
program. However, it waits for 'X' tenths of a second for input and then returns ERR, if no input is available.
'X' is the timeout value passed to the function halfdelay(). This function is useful when you want to ask the
user for input, and if he doesn't respond with in certain time, we can do some thing else. One possible example
is a timeout at the password prompt.

4. Initialization

10

